doc/design.md, before:

# Trochee design

## Single-board computer inside (or not)

The Trochee keyboard will be designed to optionally house a variety of single-board computers to provide a complete modular computing system, minus a monitor and pointing device. Built-in solutions for these may be explored in the future but are currently out of the scope of initial prototyping.

A few models will be made to house an [AtomicPi](https://www.amazon.com/Atomic-Pi-High-Speed-Peripheral/dp/B07N298F2B) single-board computer. It is sadly a bit underpowered and only has 2GB RAM, but at just $31 for an x86 processor capable of running Windows, they ought to not be passed up. For the first time, a consumer can be offered a complete modular system for a reasonable price without asking them to learn a new operating system, or be limited to using sofware that runs on ARM.

## Key layout

I'm starting with an extremely simple "unified" design, a compact 64-key layout that is an 8x8 square:

![Unified design](../resources/keys-in-holes.png)

Obviously note that there is no separate thumb cluster. Having never gotten accustomed to one I likely don't know what I'm missing, but removing it really appeals to me in terms of symmetry and space economy. The Maltron is essentially a bowl-shape anyway, I just decided to take it to its logical extreme. This also allows a single design to be used for a modified left/right handed Dvorak layout:

![Right-hand Dvorak](../resources/trochee-layout.png)

Shown above is the RH layout, a mirror image of which will be the LH version. 8 columns were chosen since it will just fit the letters in this configuration. It should be no wider as to minimize lateral finger movement, with 3 extra rows on top for the numbers, arrows and other less frequently used keys.

## Switches

* See [issue #3](https://github.com/porkostomus/trochee/issues/3)

Commit message:

link to layout on Google Sheets

doc/design.md, after:

# Trochee design

## Single-board computer inside (or not)

The Trochee keyboard will be designed to optionally house a variety of single-board computers to provide a complete modular computing system, minus a monitor and pointing device. Built-in solutions for these may be explored in the future but are currently out of the scope of initial prototyping.

A few models will be made to house an [AtomicPi](https://www.amazon.com/Atomic-Pi-High-Speed-Peripheral/dp/B07N298F2B) single-board computer. It is sadly a bit underpowered and only has 2GB RAM, but at just $31 for an x86 processor capable of running Windows, they ought to not be passed up. For the first time, a consumer can be offered a complete modular system for a reasonable price without asking them to learn a new operating system, or be limited to using sofware that runs on ARM.

## Key layout

I'm starting with an extremely simple "unified" design, a compact 64-key layout that is an 8x8 square:

![Unified design](../resources/keys-in-holes.png)

Obviously note that there is no separate thumb cluster. Having never gotten accustomed to one I likely don't know what I'm missing, but removing it really appeals to me in terms of symmetry and space economy. The Maltron is essentially a bowl-shape anyway, I just decided to take it to its logical extreme. This also allows a single design to be used for a modified left/right handed Dvorak layout:

![Right-hand Dvorak](../resources/trochee-layout.png)

The RH layout shown above was made from [this Google spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vRjTfiFQTstrNqluRF8iaFo0xzDk-sZmoSMp9G24CedqWlcVS4DPpYMg4Iupm3jnXJU9d1zzRiAe3ZJ/pubhtml). The LH version can be a mirror image of it. 8 columns were chosen since it will just fit the letters in this configuration. It should be no wider as to minimize lateral finger movement, with 3 extra rows on top for the numbers, arrows and other less frequently used keys.

## Switches

* See [issue #3](https://github.com/porkostomus/trochee/issues/3)
